good
[Music]
in these times uh during cobit when
we're all sitting at home it's it's sort
of like a ray of light that we get to
watch these amazing sessions when we
can't all be together it certainly
brightens up my evenings pandemic mayhem
digitally their politicians
who came online to view and listen to
our incredible speakers from across the
world we were able to continue in our
tradition of ensuring the free flow of
knowledge and information
[Music]
on behalf of namitago clay
and all my colleagues at teamwork arts
we welcome you to a new book launch at
jlf first edition
we're delighted to host the launch of
azra raza's work the first cell
published by harpercollins india
celebrated oncologist notre as raja is a
professor of medicine and director of
the mds center at columbia university
her new book the first cell presents a
new paradigm in the ongoing battle
against cancer a lyrical journey from
hope to despair and back again
the narrative ties together medicine and
society
raza's book emphasizes the need for
empathy intelligence and optimism as a
foundational tenet for new and
groundbreaking research and explores
cancer from multiple angles medical
scientific cultural and personal
asura raza is a chan soon shiong
professor of medicine and the director
of the mds center at the columbia
university in addition to publishing
widely in basic and clinical cancer
research raza is also the co-editor of
the highly acclaimed website three
quarks daily dot com
azra raza
thank you for joining us here today
and congratulations on your latest
brilliant book
we would love to hear you speak and
share your experiences on working on
this book
thank you so much
to you and to jlf for inviting me um
especially that special thanks are due
to my colleague
siddharth mukherjee
um who has helped me actually launch
the last uh
book launch in pakistan and the one
before that actually
in um the u.s so
he and i have become quite a team
together now in launching this book uh
thank you so much sid for taking out the
time always to do it
um
i'd like to begin by just making a
couple of points here and then turn it
back to you
obviously i'm
as you mentioned
i'm a practicing oncologist who sees 30
to 40 cancer patients every week
i also supervise a cutting edge cancer
research lab
the space that i share with siddharth
mukherjee at work
and many of our projects are of course
done together
but i think most importantly i'm also
a cancer widow
so i have had the misfortune of standing
on both sides of the bed
as a caretaker as well as
a caregiver
and so
these three
credentials
have given me a perspective of cancer
that i would wouldn't wish on my enemy
and that was one of the reasons that
finally
um forced me
to really question
some of what is going on in oncology
right now and it's a very opportune time
to be talking about it because this year
is the 50th anniversary in america
of the declaration of the so-called war
on cancer by president nixon in 1971.
the obvious question to be asked is are
we winning the war or not
and in my opinion
it is an unmitigated disaster
the second point i really that has
bothered me so much is that
we have spent in the last 50 years
95 of our resources trying to chase down
the last cancer cell and kill it
and it has ended up in producing
basically paleolithic
treatments
to treat cancer
and so i'm asking for a complete
revolution in oncology
from going after the last cell to trying
to find the first cell and prevent
cancer from becoming the end stage
monstrosity that is so hard to handle
third point i want to make is that we
must monitor wellness to find illness
so let's start by trying to find the
first selling people who are well right
now who don't have cancer but who are at
high risk for it and we'll talk more i'm
sure said will ask me about it when we
start the conversation
and finally i want to make a direct
appeal to my indian audience
you have some of the best brains in the
world and a lot of them you have all the
skills all the technology all the
resources all the money all the patience
what's stopping you from finding the
first cell why do we have to keep aping
the west
and trying to replicate what is
happening in the west and
reproduce it in the in in our countries
no we can do better than that our
patients deserve
um deserve better because those kinds of
technologies are not
um applicable to so many patients in
india
so these are some of the things that
bother me
that what is lacking is not resources
not the suffering of humanity but the
will to do something about it
and the will has to come by public
pressure and this is why i wrote the
book
thank you
thank you as well for sharing all that
with us
jlf first edition is delighted to launch
the first sale
[Music]
today together with pulitzer
prize-winning author and oncologist
mukherjee azra will explore the complex
tapestry of the disease and stress the
need to refocus their attention to the
beginning rather than the end
siddharth mukherjee is a cancer
physician and researcher a stem cell
biologist and a cancer geneticist is the
author of the laws of medicine and the
emperor of all maladies a biography of
cancer which won the 2011 pulitzer prize
in general non-fiction and the guardian
first book award
please feel free to ask questions and
comment by typing it into the comment
section
ladies and gentlemen we now present the
first cell azra raza in conversation
with siddharth mukherjee
over
well um thank you very much um azra
congratulations on the book um
congratulations on the launch in india
um we are
going to be in conversation for
i think about half an hour and then we
have time for some questions
so let me begin by asking you
um you know when i first read the book i
read a very early
version of the book
and obviously was deeply affected
deeply impressed
i want to talk a little bit about the
fact that this is not one book but three
books
um there
this is a a personal biography
of you as you said as the as a cancer
widow um including the time before you
were a cancer widow um
the cancer caregiver um
[Music]
people who read this book will know that
azra's husband
died a very prominent cancer researcher
himself
uh died of
cancer
in under very tragic circumstances when
her
daughter was very young
so this is a this is a biography of that
it is it is that journey
um
the second thing is that it is a a there
is a historic journey as well you talked
about the war on cancer uh what has gone
right what's gone wrong
why we are here how we got here etc
and the third book is a a polemic a plea
to do something different about what
happens and the science that will drive
a new way of thinking about uh so about
about cancer so i want to talk about all
these three books in some ways
separately but also intertwine them
um but the book begins with of course
your personal journey the journey of
your
your husband's cancer
there's an extraordinarily moving
uh moment in the book which left an
image in my brain
of you going to the airport um taking a
flight
and and your husband suddenly breaking
out into
uh terrifying sweats
um and really being unable to even
function
um
tell us a little bit about
about your
what what changed or or or the change
that happens to someone
uh to you
um tell us about the change in your
family tell us about that journey a
little bit so that readers know that
that you know you're not just a cancer
doctor but a cancer caregiver and as you
say a cancer widow
thank you so much sid for starting with
uh
with that personal journey
before i answer your question though
i'd like your advice about something
which is i was speaking to barkhad on an
interview yesterday
and she asked me not exactly this
question but she asked me
asra how did you change after
your husband's
disease illness and as you took care of
him
and
i was telling her that it didn't change
me as an oncologist really but it
changed my perceptions of life forever
but then when i looked at the kind of uh
of remarks that i got on this talk
yesterday
most of them are horrifying remarks
saying what kind of a doctor is this
what kind of an oncologist is she that
she only became aware of pain when she
share a pain of cancer patients when she
shared a bed with a cancer patient type
of thing
i want your advice about how do we
handle this kind of an issue if i talk
about my personal story it is as if i
don't care about other patients and i'm
only aware of the issues of cancer
because it struck my own home
well i think i mean there's no advice
here that the only advice i have to give
i i would
tell you this too is is to ignore
ignore those comments because
first of all they're untrue
um i know you and i know the book i know
how you've taken care of patients over
decades um
and it's
it's simply not true um
it is um
the
the idea
that the personal
and the and the medical
are intertwined um
is
is so old
um
you know it originates in the beginnings
of medicine
um
and so the absurdity of of your
not being influenced as an oncologist um
is is is an absurdity um
but on the other hand let me turn the
question back to you i mean
you know obviously um
your experience
there is nothing
whatever people say
that
will substitute for the personal
experience of grief
um
[Music]
that doesn't mean that that grief
that does mean that that grief spills
over
into every aspect of your life
and certainly as a doctor this is an
ancient discipline where
you know we deal with with grief on a
daily basis
we are the merchants of grief
um
and so
leaving aside the absurdity of those
comments um
tell us about you know tell us about how
how it how it changed you personally we
know from the book but how it changed
your practice as an as an oncologist
thank you so much for making those
comments i wanted them to come from you
so that
people do understand that at every level
even when we are using the most precise
of sciences we are trying to also
basically precisely catalog the
sensorial issues with the same precision
and that it's not just i mean
cancer is not just a disease it is an
illness
and what's the difference between
disease and illness is that disease is
something that oncologists will diagnose
but illness is something patients feel
and of course all diseases are the same
but cancer is particularly so
simply because
it can affect all the organs it's uh
just the name cancer the word cancer it
has got a stigma with it it's got such
horrifying
perceptions that come with it the whole
family is affected i want to be very
honest by saying that when i began to
write the book i had no intention of
telling anything about my personal story
and
people who have known me for years knew
that 20 years had gone by since my own
husband died i had never talked about it
but you know sid what happened to me
when i started writing my other patients
and i looked at the granularity of
detail with which i was writing about
their pain their suffering their
emotional
upheavals
i felt that it would be
insincere
i somehow felt
it it would be dishonest
not to talk about my own pain protect
myself and my family and expose
everybody else
but once i started to then write about
harvey and what happened to me
then like you pointed out it became a
red line going through
every chapter of the book
and that's what makes the book very very
strong as you know the
the
the the red line is is of course
the line that that that connects um
you with your patients you with your
husband you with your family um
and it brings us to
the questions that we need to ask which
is you know
why why did he suffer
what does suffering mean at what point
of time you know there's a line and
there's a line in
in one of the
recent pieces that i wrote which
talks about the half-life of grief
there is no half-life of grief
uh there's a half-life of
radioactivity but there is no half-life
of grief 20 years is
40 years 40 years is 80 years eight
years is 160 years and there is no
half-life
and what's interesting about the about
the book is that
we realize that there is no half-life
it transmutes your grief transmutes it
becomes you know
harvey is gone
you have a child to raise by yourself
but that half-life now becomes a
different kind of
you know way that you are dealing with
your life
um and of course it becomes
a compassion that you already had for
your patients
but a realization of you know that you
have also gone through the you know you
have crossed the rook on yourself
um
and that's what makes you an even better
oncologist
in some ways
um
so um let's turn a little bit um away
from the personal
to the um to the historical journey
um you know you as you said we happen to
be celebrating
um a milestone moment in in in american
history
um tell us your impression about
you know um you you've been involved
with this right from the beginning
you've been very close to the national
cancer institute
you're a student of history
um
tell me about sort of what went right
and what went wrong and why
things went right and wrong
sid i feel that there is a lot that has
gone right in the last 50 years
and for example there were many
disparate efforts looking at cancer so
the first thing the war on cancer did
was to bring all these together under
one umbrella it really unified and we
made it much stronger
by bringing some method to the madness
secondly i think it laid the foundation
of doing clinical trials it laid the
foundation of collecting
large amounts of data
from patients
i think it opened the whole area of
of supportive care for patients i think
it did a lot to take away the stigma of
cancer women could talk openly about
having breast cancer about having
ovarian cancer etc
and i think the biggest thing it did is
to invest a lot of money in
deep and basic cancer research that has
led to
a dramatic improvement literally in
quantum leaps in our understanding
at a very molecular genetic level our
understanding of cancer so all of these
things are fantastic
but i do think that on the other hand so
this is all that has gone right also
let me not forget it opened the whole
area
and funded the whole area of
of
anti-smoking campaigns anti-obesity
campaigns screening measures mammograms
colonoscopy
psa pap smears so all of these are
fabulous successes
but why did i say it is a spectacular
failure at the start of this is because
while the patients have indirectly
benefited from all this
the truth is that if somebody presents
with an advanced glioblastoma which is a
brain tumor
or of stage 4 let's say pancreatic
cancer
or a stage 4 ovarian cancer then their
outcome
is really no different today than it was
in 1930
and that's a spectacular failure to me
the other thing is
yes we are curing two thirds of the
patients who are diagnosed with cancer
today but my question is curing with
what
the same slash poison burn by and large
so where has all that 250
billion dollars a quarter of a trillion
dollars in basic research where are the
new cancer treatments for the most
common types of cancers
yes there have been advances but not the
way they should have been not the way
they were envisioned and the last thing
i want to say is i think there is a
misunderstanding about
president nixon's declaration of war
he
declared war on cancer with the goal of
eliminating the disease not
understanding the disease you see to
understand so complex a disease as
cancer will take a thousand years the
idea is somehow
find it early eliminate it before
understanding everything about it it's
like saying you know i don't have to
understand every single intracellular
molecular pathway of my digestive system
to enjoy my meal
um i want to talk a little bit about
those failures
but turn the conversation now towards
making them into successes
um so this is the third strand of the
book
um which is in which you propose a a new
way forward
so talk to us about the new way forward
and then let's uh dive a little bit more
deeply into
what that new way forward might look
like
i think uh
totally an exciting area and i'm so
optimistic and that's how i really have
talked about at the end
in the book about the excitement i feel
um for example this pandemic gave me an
opportunity to put together an amazing
think tank because it i've always felt
that soul
single voices really especially in
science
uh can be easily drowned out but if we
build a consensus around something if we
bring together a number of really
first-rate scientists and thought
leaders in the field then because of
that consensus there is a greater power
to it
so i put together this think tank of 30
top leaders in the country from colombia
harvard hopkins md anderson university
of chicago northwestern university city
of hope in l.a and joplin missouri these
are some of the best minds in the
country you are one of them sid you are
part of this think tank
and we had 17 two hour long meetings
now imagine having 30 people
who
pretty much all of them think that
they're halfway
to stockholm to pick up their nobel
prize
uh but bringing them together for 17
meetings two hours each and
and really debating every aspect of
cancer and then coming up with an
opinion paper which
consensus of it
that you and i with the 30 other leaders
were published in scientific american in
january of this year
and the bottom line that we all agreed
on is that
in the future we have our goal in cancer
research and treatment must be to find
the first cell as early as possible and
try to prevent it
immediately right there and then arrest
it and prevent it from progressing
and towards this goal we
uh we all concluded that the best way to
do it would be to look at to start by
trying to find early cancer
you see i'm by early i don't mean
stage 1 or stage 2 cancer because that
already requires
you know
surgeries and chemotherapies we are
talking about way before the first stage
and when even in stage one cancers there
are millions and millions of cells
um how do we find the first cell well we
suggested that we should start by
looking at people who are at high risk
of getting cancer but they don't have
cancer yet
one of those groups we
we picked and all these universities
have agreed to
put these high risk individuals on um to
this first cell center for early
detection of cancer
and the idea is we will start saving
samples of blood
saliva
urine
feces hair nails from these individuals
periodically and within three years we
will have 50 thousand individuals
two thousand of them will have developed
cancer and we will have all the early
samples on these two thousand
individuals and that's where we are
going to find the the earliest
footprints of cancer even maybe before
the appearance of the first cell and
that's when once we find it we
understand what it is we can go ahead
and look at healthy people and
and monitor them for the appearance of
the first cell and the last thing i want
to end by saying is that look
why should it be just you and me sid and
30 other leaders or eight universities
i'm asking
um in fact in the book over and over
that sure we have cancer patients today
we have to take care of them and we
should spend 50 percent of our resources
doing just that but not hurting them at
least
not giving them treatments that produce
no benefit for eighty percent patients
the benefit they produced in twenty
percent last uh
improved survival by two months and
financially ruins 42 percent of people
being diagnosed with cancer in america
today financially completely ruins them
we shouldn't use those treatments
i'm saying 50 of the resources should be
used for current cancer patients for
better things
the other 50 we should invest in
studying how to find the first cell and
financially incentivizing this new goal
of the first cell and then everyone will
want to turn around when the money is
there
the part of money that they want to
compete for is now in the first cell
more and more good minds will go for it
and india you should definitely do it
i want to talk a little bit about the
strategies that that came out of these
meetings that you organized
um
one very important uh
question
was how to maximize the capture
of patients who are likely to develop
cancer obviously you know if
if you're doing a study and
only
0.0001
of those patients
develop cancer in the next five years
then of course um you know your study
has to be massive
in order to capture that one patient
um
what are the strategies that we can use
to
find patients who are at a much greater
likelihood of developing cancer
and how do we intend to
involve these strategies such that
you know we get really meaningful
results as people deposit all these
samples
into the repository that you've called
for
as you know we debated a lot sid about
water who are the people at high risk
and um
and i think you had summarized it very
well uh in one of the meetings that
basically people who are born with some
genetic susceptibility there are certain
syndromes certain mutations many people
know about brca1 and 2 mutations that
put women at high risk of getting
ovarian or breast cancers there are
other syndromes like mutations in p53
gene believe romani syndrome
that's one group a second group is
people who have been exposed to toxins
such as people who have received
chemotherapy radiation therapy so these
cancer survivors are at risk of another
another cancer
i think you know another group is
people like who are heavy smokers and
also have lung disease in addition so
that combination
also puts people at higher risk of
getting lung cancer
we debated a lot about which which
particular group should we pick
and and and in the end after a lot of
debate we
uh fixated and focused on
people who have been treated for one
cancer already for for a couple of very
good reasons one is that in america one
in five
new cancers is diagnosed in a cancer
survivor second is that people who have
been treated for one cancer even if they
are cured they keep coming to the
medical center for checkups regular
checkups so they're already connected
and we have this amazing population of
patients
who are cancer survivors i mean think of
it said that md anderson cancer center
in houston has
seized 80 000 cancer survivors a year
80 000 that's a wonderful number in the
country in america there's like 16 to 17
million cancer survivors now so we
fixated on this group they are coming to
the cancer centers we can get samples
from them periodically as they come and
when they develop cancer and they have
uh i don't want to scare anybody please
don't and a lot of people have had
cancer who are listening to this talk
i'm not telling you you're going to
develop cancer it's a very slightly
higher percentage of cancers but people
who keep coming to the center
because they want checkups it's easier
to follow them
so as we tie up and move towards the
questions um what's the next book you're
going to write
you know sid i grew up in karachi
pakistan and
[Music]
one reason that i left my beloved city
was that i felt after becoming a doctor
that if i stayed back
i would not be able to follow my
my heart's uh
quest which is um which is the
scientific uh an intellectual challenge
of
finding um of studying cancer i was
fascinated since i was 18 about the fact
that within our body
there is a cell
that has found the key to immortality to
live forever
there is no other life form on this
planet which has done that and i was so
fascinated as a young person
uh that i would love to understand how
this cell has done it and then that
would give us the key to agelessness
basically
but i knew that if i stayed back in
pakistan i wouldn't be able to do the
science because i would become an
activist
and so
i came to america because this is the
country that has the most affluence and
is able to invest in science with the
with the
uh
with impunity really
um and with great generosity
uh i have to say that whether the
president is trump or mr biden they
equally understand the importance of
research and development and investment
in
in these areas
and so i came to america with the idea
that now i'll be able to do the real
science and and
and help my patients but guess what
after 40 years i've become an activist
so
the fate has followed me from pakistan
to here and i was thinking about it
a lot in this last year which we you
know all of us due to the pandemic have
had social isolation a lot of time to
to think about these things
so when you ask me what is the next book
i'm going to write
i don't know about the book but i'm
writing a series of essays to clear the
cobwebs in my own head about
uh so what is the exact route to the
first cell and how difficult it is to
even cite the earliest changes that are
occurring uh in the body
that gives to the that gives rise to the
appearance of the first cell so i would
say that the the the kind of things i'm
imagining at the moment are how to get
fastest to trapping the first cell and
eliminating it and and a lot is going on
in the country bring it together
great
um
i think we are now going to move on to
some questions and so
um
let me ask you the first one this is
from arpana
um says
she asks tell us a little about the
first cell center
for cancer survivors what stage is it
is it at right now
obviously she's very interested
and
you know tell us about the scale of the
project
wonderful thank you for asking that
question because great news is that
after trying for a few months
once we reached a consensus that this
was the right thing to do the obvious
issue was to raise money
we went to the national cancer institute
first and we were spurned so to say
uh and so
um i went to private sources and we have
been able to raise 15 million dollars
for the center immediately because
private investors see the
logic of what we are seeing
and and they see that this can happen
very fast very quickly
i do feel that uh in order to show in
order to change the any paradigm we have
to show success of the new one
when the word processor came around
nobody thinks of the typewriter when we
start showing the success of the first
cells
detection and prevention nobody is going
to worry about what kind of end stage
therapies we were developing
um the center
is fully funded now for the full three
years all the eight universities are
fully on board
number three we have the
uh you know the protocol was written and
submitted to institutional review boards
and these are going through the multiple
steps we are hoping that within the next
two to three months we will start
actually depositing samples in the
central facility which will be columbia
university as you know i have already
collected 60 000 samples on thousands of
my patients since 1984.
so we have all the experience where we
know exactly what to do and how to
maintain a tissue repository so i think
samples will start arriving now this is
just depositing samples in the tissue
repository once we have the 2000
individuals who out of 50 000 who have
developed a second cancer and we have
all these samples how do we go study
them
give me some advice but one thing i was
thinking of was that there are
16 million cancer survivors in america
even if one million of them just give us
10 dollars a month for a year what's 10
a month the price of a starbucks coffee
with a bagel if they give us ten dollars
a month just for one year we'll have 110
million dollars and enough to really
go and study and interrogate all the
samples we want using multi-omics
technology and everything else that we
are planning to do so i think the cancer
center for for cancer survivors
is pretty much
rolling on the way and we are going to
pick up speed and this is going to
happen very quickly and within the first
year we'll start to see results because
we'll have 500
cancer patients second cancer patients
already in the first year
um there is a question from lipica who
it's a very practical question but i
think that there's so much interest in
this
uh in the practicalities that i will ask
it um you know it's
it's a it's a very down in the weeds
question
but but i think it's important enough
especially in the indian context um
what is the current status of
correlation between covet 19 and cancer
that's
the second question i think is probably
more important how are cancer patients
dealing with the vaccine
um are they allowed to take it and what
do we know about the response of cancer
patients to cover vaccination what are
you doing and how is this how are we
dealing with
with the intersection of covalent cancer
sid i'll answer the covet vaccine for
cancer patients question a little but
then you need to answer the first part
why don't you go ahead and answer the
first part
well so um you know
i have to say that you know we've been
doing a lot of research
we were able to
uh collect um also i don't even know if
i've told you about this project uh but
it's been in the news a lot um
and it's uh in submission to nature um
but we collected uh very granular data
on um 1 million patients who were
vaccinated in bahrain
um
the data is extraordinarily granular in
age
comorbidities everything uh
for these patients
um and so
we are now searching that database
uh to see how because uh the
comorbidities do record cancer
and we're searching that database to see
at a systematic level not an anecdotal
level but at a systematic level
what is the
response rate
and what's nice about it is that most of
the studies that have looked at this so
far the question
have looked at the question by measuring
antibodies and other things in the blood
what we call surrogates
this study measures whether the patients
are actually being hospitalized whether
they're getting infected
what strain they're getting infected
with whether they're going to the icu
and whether they're dying
so we will have
extraordinarily granular data on a
million patients
uh to tell us
exactly how they're responding not just
using surrogates
but using really you know clinical
outcomes um
and we hope to
you know obviously present this to the
world because it's an incredibly
important resource for for cancer
patients
i hope you've added the bcg part to it
have they received bcg vaccine uh they
have not because it was it was not a bcg
rich
uh
nation
um
and um as you know you know the
controversy about vcg still continues um
uh it's been very difficult to
figure out whether bcg is a surrogate
whether it's
what what the relationship is but this
study does not have any information bcg
well the thing that has affected me sid
is that in america
especially in new york and boston where
the data are available
people who are living in homeless
shelters they have some of the most
impoverished horrible conditions that
they're living under
and the covet infection rate be is high
there but no one or very few people have
died in homeless shelters and and the
easier explanation for it of course
there's no proof for any of it is that
they have had been exposed to tb they
have latent tb or
they have some non-specific stimulation
of their immune system which has helped
them deal with this virus as well
anyway that's uh would be very
interesting i think only someone like
you with your reach could have done this
study in bahrain um i hope you when i
finish you'll tell the story of how you
got to do it because that store that
story you told me
um anyway the answer to the vaccine
question for cancer patients is yes they
must get it actually
what we try to do is at least let two
weeks pass after they've had
chemotherapy and let two weeks before
they get the next turnaround of
chemotherapy and then you're perfectly
safe in giving it and except for very
few kinds of patients somebody going
undergoing a transplant because we have
such severe immune suppression in those
people to try and get over the graft
versus host disease that they require
full vaccination uh afterwards even
vaccination that they had received as
children for
for say tetanus and diphtheria and polio
have to all be repeated after they get
to
finish with the immune suppression
except for patients like that vaccines
are are and must be given to cancer
patients but say do tell them about how
you got to do the barren study
well i'll tell them very quickly i was
at a conference um
and
i was a google conference everyone the
google conference it's it is being
modest but of course you know his fame
in america is in the stratosphere so
he's always invited to the top
conferences and this thing happened at
google conference go ahead so i was
giving a talk on kovid and cancer
and i saw these two people furiously
exchanging cell phones
um while while this was happening so at
the end of my talk i went up to them and
i said who are you
um because i'm very blunt and uh the guy
said i'm the crown prince of bahrain
and this is the minister of health of
bahrain i mean this is kind of a magical
story you don't get this uh on a
day-to-day basis basis and i said well
why are you exchanging your cell phones
and they said well because we get uh
every hour we get an update
on the kovic task force in bahrain and
we have one million patients
uh
that we have
all this granular data on in a huge
excel spreadsheet and i said well have
you thought about publishing it and they
said oh what do you mean publishing it
you know this is for our internal use
and i said the entire world is waiting
for this data you know what is the level
of breakthrough infection what is
happening during delta et cetera et
cetera so they were able to share with
us we used google's
extraordinary analytical powers to be
able to uh process the data and that's
what we've brought up into the world but
let's end on a hopeful note
um
you know this book is your book has
caused waves uh across the world it has
caused waves at the national cancer
institute
um the our group spoke with doug louis
um at the national cancer institute and
he was extraordinarily impressed about
the effort um and was very supportive of
it
um
you know
the the idea that once you detect the
first cancer cell
um what you know just just give us a
sense a picture of what will happen to
that patient what what happens next
well the what we are aiming for with the
biomedical engineers at columbia
university first of all is to develop
a tiny little chip i hope you can see
this which can be inserted under the
skin which can be inserted at birth in
little babies which will constantly
monitor for the appearance of the first
cell that can be detected by simply
putting a tiny device that passes over
this chip under the skin
um
and and through ultrasonic uh technology
can detect the collection of cells
that's happening
so
first of all we want to be able to do
that second what if we detect the first
cell now what well now it can be killed
by targeted therapies all the therapies
you are developing sid the cell
therapies that you are developing that
can be directed to uh with with
with exquisite precision
to target some molecule on an abnormal
cell
instead of using
toxic radiation therapy we can use
lasers laser-guided therapies to get rid
of these
these uh fractions of cells circulating
we can use things like antibodies
attached to sensors that can go and
specifically um identify and
and so the idea is that
there's a lot that is available already
that can be applied
a lot cannot be applied of course
because we don't need to give a bone
marrow transplant to someone who has a
thousand first cells of course not uh
the the the treatment the technologies
are limitless and and we have the
capacity to explore them so i wanted to
thank you um for your contribution
i'm sure the readers of your book will
be edified there's much much more i
assure you in the book um and turn it
back to
sharper to
end this wonderful session
thank you thank you for that vital
conversation sharing personal stories
perspectives and information that is so
useful for all of us thank you
we would like to share with all of you
that jlf london at the british library
will be presented from the 24th to the
26th of september please do register to
receive information and to be able to
watch the fabulous sessions that are in
store for you
if you enjoyed watching our sessions
please leave a like on our videos
it helps in bringing more new content to
you
subscribe to our channel for more
sessions like this and click the bell
notification icon to stay up to date
on any new videos we release we'd like
to hear from you on our sessions that on
all these sessions that we showcase so
please do leave us a comment in the
comment section
and we hope that you will stay logged on
to watch our next session
an island karen jennings in conversation
with bang mai para
this will be broadcast here at 8 30 pm
ist
see you
[Music]
in these times uh during cobait when
we're all sitting at home it's it's sort
of like a ray of light that we get to
watch these amazing sessions when we
can't all be together
to view and listen to our incredible
speakers from across the world we were
able to continue in our tradition of
ensuring the free flow of knowledge and
information
you